.TH CI_COMPILE 2 "April 11, 1999" "UPS 3.x" "C Interpreter API"
.SH NAME
ci_compile - Compile a parse tree into byte-code.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <mtrprog/ifdefs.h>
.br
.B #include <local/ukcprog.h>
.br
.B #include <ups.h>
.br
.B #include <symtab.h>
.br
.B #include <ci.h>
.br
.B #include <xc_opcodes.h>
.br
.B #include <xc_machine.h>
.br
.B #include <xc_builtins.h>
.br
.B #include <cc.h>
.sp
\fBlinkinfo_t *
.br
ci_compile(\fIsrcpath\fB, \fIparse_id\fB, \fIreport_error\fB, \fIcheckarg_proc\fB,
\fIregno_to_addr_proc\fB, \fIflags\fB)
.br
const char *\fIsrcpath\fB; 
.br
parse_id_t \fIparse_id\fB;
.br
ci_report_error_func_t \fIreport_error\fB;
.br
ci_checkarg_proc_t \fIcheckarg_proc\fB;
.br
ci_regno_to_addr_proc_t \fIregno_to_addr_proc\fB;
.br
unsigned \fIflags\fB;
.sp
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This function converts the supplied parse tree to byte-code. 
.PP
.I srcpath 
should point to a filename if compiling a source file; otherwise set 
it to any suitable name. 
.PP
.I parse_id 
must be a valid parse tree returned by 
.BR ci_parse_file() . 
.PP
.I report_error 
should point to an error reporting function such as 
.BR cc_report_error() . 
.PP
.I checkarg_proc 
is optional; set it to 
.B NULL 
if not required. The UPS debugger uses this callback (see
.B checkarg()
in
.B ups/ui_misc.c
) to push argument types when calling indirect functions. This allows
a function such as 
.B $printf() 
to determine the types of arguments supplied to it.
.PP
I do not know the purpose of 
.I regno_to_addr_proc 
; set it to 
.BR NULL . 
.PP
.I flags 
is used to alter the compiler's behaviour. Multiple flags can be or'd if 
required. Following flags are allowed.
.PP
.TP
.B CI_CP_CHECKSP	      
This flag enables run-time checking of the Stack Pointer.
.br
.TP
.B CI_CP_DONT_PANIC      
If this flag is set, the Interpreter generates an error message rather than 
aborting on errors. Always set this flag when using the Interpreter in foreign 
applications.
.br
.TP
.B CI_CP_CHECK_DIV	      
This enables divide by zero checking at run-time.
.br
.TP
.B CI_CP_ONEFILE         
Set this flag when compiling a single source file. This flag must be set
when using the Interpreter within an application. 
.br
.TP
.B CI_CP_WANT_REG_RELOCS
I do not know the purpose of this flag.
.br
.TP
.B CI_CP_WANT_SYMINFO    
Compile with this flag if you want symbol table information. This is
equivalent to supplying the -g flag to the compiler.
.PP
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, a pointer to structure of type 
.B linkinfo_t
is returned. On failure, this function returns
.BR NULL .
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ci_parse_file (2), 
.br
.BR ci_free_linkinfo (2), 
.br
.BR ci_make_machine_from_linkinfo (2)
