.\" $Id$
.\" @(#)helptext.man	3.36   29 Aug 2000
.\"
.\"   This file is nroff source for UPS help topics that
.\"   are not direct copies of the manual page text.
.\"   It uses the same man page macros as ups.man, but
.\"   is not intended to be placed in a man page directory
.\"   as part of the install process.
.\"
.de Id
.ds Rv \\$3
.ds Dt \\$4
..
.Id $Id$
.\" A sequence to switch into the font for example text
.if t .ds Cb \f(CB
.if n .ds Cb \fB
.if t .ds Cr \f(CR
.if n .ds Cr \fB
.\" 
.\"
.\" ####################################
.\" .Sc - print the argument in small caps
.de Sc
\s-2\\$1\s0\\$2
..
.\" ####################################
.\"
.\" ####################################
.\" .Cm - print a menu command caption
.de Cm
\\$3\&\fB\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.\" ####################################
.\" .Ob - print the name of a display area object
.de Ob
\\$3\&\fB\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.\" ####################################
.\"
.\" ####################################
.\" .fX - print the argument in a fixed font
.de fX
\\$3\&\*(Cr\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.\" ####################################
.\"
.\" .En - .IP with Courier heading
.de En
.IP "\*(Cr\\$1\fP \fI\\$2\fP" 20
..
.\" ####################################
.\" .Vs - start example
.de Vs
.in +4m
\*(Cr
.nf
..
.\" ####################################
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" ####################################
.\" .Ve - end example
.de Ve
.fi
.ft P
.in -4m
.sp 0.3v
..
.\" ####################################
.\"
.\"
.\" ####################################
.\" String register .Bo - outdented bullet
.ds Bo \h'-1.3n'\(bu
.\"
.\"
.TH UPS HELP 1 \*(Dt Local
.SH AUTHORS
UPS was written by Mark Russell, while at the University of Kent, UK.
Original version for the ICL Perq
and many of the important ideas by John Bovey, University of
Kent.

.SH ABOUT X RESOURCES
UPS can be configured to meet individual preferences through
X resources.

As with any X application, you specify an X resource in the
file .Xdefaults in your home directory.  Typical lines
in .Xdefaults look like:
.Vs
*.Font: fixed            /* default font*/
Ups.Geometry: 650x550     /* Geometry for Ups */
.Ve
The first example, with the initial '*', specifies your preferred
font for any X application.
The second example, with the initial "Ups", specifies the
width and height ( in pixels) of the main window for ups only.
Other X applications may look for a Geometry resource, but will not
pick up the one specified for UPS.

If  you want to specify not only width and height, but exact position,
use the following form of the Geometry resource:
.Vs
Ups.Geometry: 650x550+20+30  /* Geometry for Ups */
.Ve
This example will place the main UPS window 20 pixels in and  30 down
from the upper left corner of the screen.  Replace the + signs with -
for a position relative to the right side or bottom of the screen.

Your .Xdefaults file is normally processed when you start X.
After editing your .Xdefaults file, run "xrdb -load ~/.Xdefaults"
to process the file so that X applications will see your changes.

Many X resources used by UPS have command line equivalents.
The font may be specified on the command line with "-fn <font>", and 
the geometry with "-geometry <geometry_spec>".
You can to use the command line versions to experiment, then
set up the resource in you .Xdefaults file if you like the result.
.SH FONTS AND COLORS
In addition to the standard X resources for fonts and colors, UPS
allows for special fonts in breakpoint code or as menu text; and
UPS has extensive options for setting up colors.  These are completely
documented in the UPS man page, so we do not reproduce them
here.

The standard UPS color scheme is set up by the file "Ups", contained
in the UPS distribution.  If UPS comes up black and white, it is probably
because that file has not been properly installed.  It should be
installed as /usr/lib/X11/app-defaults/Ups.

If for some reason you can not place the Ups file
in that directory, set up one of the following environment variables
to specify the directory containing the Ups file:
.Vs
XAPPLRESDIR - directory containing Ups
XUSERFILESEARCHPATH -
	    Colon separated list of directories to search
.Ve
Simple fonts may be specified by aliases such as "8x13" for a font that is
8 pixels wide and 13 high. See the file /usr/lib/X11/fonts/misc/fonts.alias
for available font aliases.
.SH SPLIT SCREENS
The standard UPS configuration is as a single top level X window with
three main regions: the display window ( display of stack, variables, etc.),
the source display, and the output window (output of $printf, help, etc.). 
Three alternate configurations are possible.

To split off the combined source and output windows as a separate top level
window, use the following X resource:
.Vs
Ups.WantSplitWindows: yes
.Ve
or start UPS with the -split on the command line.

To split off the output alone window as a separate top level
window, use the following X resource:
.Vs
Ups.WantSplitOutputWindows: yes
.Ve
or start UPS with the -splitoutwin on the command line.

To split off both the source and output windows, use both X resources,
or use both command line options.

If your X display has more than one screen, you can arrange the the
multiple UPS windows come up on different screens.  See the UPS manual
page for details.

To specify the geometry of the source and output windows, use the
X resources Ups.Src.Geometry and Ups.Output.Geometry.
.SH AUTOMATIC RAISE AND LOWER
You can arrange that UPS will automatically raise itself, becoming the
foremost X window, when the debugged process stops.  This
can be convenient if the application window hides the UPS window
so you don't realize that it's stopped.  You can also arrange
that UPS lowers itself when the process goes back into run.
This can be convenient in putting the debugged application back in
the front where you can work with it.  Or you can arrange that
UPS iconifies itself; on some window managers that might be more
convient the lowering itself since it puts the UPS icon where you
can quickly find it.

You can change these settings at any time with the popup menu under
the "Windows" button at the top of the UPS window.  To control
the initial setting, set the following X resources or use the
following command line options:
.Vs
To raise on a break
   Ups.WantRaiseOnBreak: yes    or -raise_on_break

To raise on a break and lower on run
   Ups.WantLowerOnRun: yes      or -lower_on_run

To raise on a break and iconify on run
   Ups.WantIconifyOnRun: yes    or -iconify_on_run
.Ve

For the lower and iconify options, you can adjust the period
UPS waits before lowering or iconifying itself with the
following X resource:
.Vs
Ups.LowerOnRunTime: 1000     /* delay time in milliseconds */
.Ve
The default delay is 1500, or 1.5 seconds.
.SH BREAKPOINT MENU
When you make a selection with the source window popup menu
UPS remembers your selection and makes it the default the
next time you use that menu.  This can be convenient if you are
going to use "Execute to here" several times in a row to step
through a section of code.  But it can be a problem if you forget
that your last selection was "Execute to here" and try to set a 
breakpoint.

You can make the menu default stay fixed on "Add breakpoint" by
setting the following X resource
.Vs
Ups.SourceMenuDefault: AddBreakPoint
.Ve
You can also use this resource to select any of the other menu options
as the fixed default.  Also, can arrange to have an alternate default
selected by pressing the shift key and right mouse button, or you can
use that combination to deliberately change the default.  The
the UPS manual page for details.
.SH SCROLLING
UPS scroll bars work differently from most X applications.
In UPS, you move the mouse up to move the display up,
and down to move the display down.   To reverse these directions, use
the following X resource:
.Vs
Ups.ScrollbarType: MOTIF
.Ve

You may find that UPS scrolls too fast.  To introduce some delay in the
scroll loop, use the following X resource:
.Vs
Ups.ScrollDelay: 40
.Ve
values between 25 and 50 usually produce good results.
.SH REMOVING THE MOUSEHOLE
The "mousehole" is the region in the upper right corner of
the main UPS window that updates to show what actions are
invoked by the three mouse buttons.  To remove the mousehole, obtaining
more space for the typing line and error message text, use the following
X resource:
.Vs
Ups.WantMousehole: no
.Ve
or start UPS with -nomousehole on the command line.

This option can be especially useful with large fonts, which make the
typing line rather short.


